Slide 1
    Hello and welcome to my thesis presentation.
    I've met many of you before, many of you I haven't met.
    My name is Thomas and I started doing this thesis two years 
    ago with Giovanni and Alessandro as supervisor. Well the project 
    got dragged out a bit, so forgive me if the some thing is not up to 
    date, but I'll try to present it as clear as possible.
    So without furthur adue I'll proceed.

Slide 2
    As seen, this thesis is called Collective behaviors of autonomous 
    robots in complex environment, which is a mouthful of words. 
    The keyword here is collective behaviors or synonymously 
    collective motion which can be defined as 

    "the spontaneous emergence of ordered movement in 
    a system consisting of many self-propelled agents"

    Collective behaviors is a common process in living systems 
    and be seen everywhere in nature, in different scales both
    macroscopic and microscopic scales. As the name suggests 
    collective behavior involves a collection of agents or 
    units, in other words many agents. 
    
    Here are some examples of systems that exhibit collective behaviors

Slide 3
    On top row you see the single unit that makes up the system and on 
    the bottom is the collective behavior that can emerge out from a 
    systems of similar units. In (B) we have schooling of fishes that swirls 
    around, a defence behavior against predators. In (C) is the flock of birds
    migrating, trevelling on flocks decrease the likelihood of being attacked 
    by predators. (F) cooperation of ants where they are surrounding some sort 
    of liquid. (H) spiral collective motion of bacteria.

    Common to all these systems is that their individual units are capable 
    of self-propulsion. These units are often referred to as Self-prpelled 
    particles or Active particles.

Slide 4
    The term “active” refers here to the ability of 
    individual units to move actively by gaining
    kinetic energy from the environment. All living 
    organisms in different scales can be seen as active particles.

    In microscale we have for example, motile cells, bacteria, synthetic 
    microswimmers. In macroscale already mentioned animals, robots 
    which can be considered as artificial self-propelled particles 
    and also humans. Which can show collective behavior such as situation 
    where pedestrians spontaneously organizing into traffic lanes when 
    moving in opposite directions on a crowded hallway.

    Here are some active particles in different scales.

Slide 5
    In microscale, the kinesin protein walking along microtubule 
    filaments and bacteria swimming on a petri dish.
    I macroscale, a herd of wild cattle crossing a river, and 
    a swarm of starlings.

    The earliest attempt to model collective behavior was done by 
    Reynolds 1987.

Slide 6
    Reynolds introduced the boids model to simulate the
    swarm behavior of animals at the macroscale within computer
    graphics applications. In 1995 Vicsek introduced the Vicsek model 
    where the swarm behavior is modelled by active particles that are driven 
    with a constant absolut velocity and they tend to align with the average 
    direction of motion of the particles in their neighbourhood. 
    The Vicsek model was the first to consider
    collective motion in terms of a noise-induced phase transition
    and, together with its multiple variants, has become one of
    the most often employed models. Here the simplest form the Vicsek model 
    is shown, how the particles position and direction is updated each time step. 
    The positional changes is straighforward. The directional changes includes 
    erandom noise picked from an interval and the average direction of the 
    particles neighbours inside a radius r. 

Slide 7
    Later on several additional models have been introduced to capture the 
    properties of collective behaviors, also experimental studies has been 
    done on systems feature collective behaviors.

    One paper that was a big inspiration for this thesis is 
    "Metastable clusters and channels formed by active particles with
    aligning interactions"

Slide 8
    Done by Nilsson and Volpe 2017. Here active particles were studied 
    using numerical simulations. The model used here is similar to 
    the Vicsek model where the active particles have a short-range 
    position-dependent aligning interactions. Again xi uniformly distributed 
    white-noise term in an interval. Tn is a torque term that the particles 
    exert on each other. When introducing passive particles in the simulation 
    we can see here how the active particles behave at different noise level. 
    Note that the motion of the passive particles are merely through translational 
    diffusion and their displacement is significantly smaller than the active particles.
    While the active particles move at a constant speed mentioned before. 

    Here at four different noise levels, four snaphots was taken at different timesteps 
    where we can se that when using high noise level he motion of the
    active particles is significantly hindered by the presence of the 
    passive particles and is essentially diffusive, this behavior is also 
    measured using the mean square displacement seen here.

Slide 9
    as shown by the mean square displacement (MSD), the case with highest noise
    has a slope of lesser than one at all time. The active particles compress the 
    passive ones and create small pockets where they are confined, this leads to a 
    subdiffusive behavior where msd(tau)/tau decreases for large tau. 
    When decreases the noise level even more the active particles are able to move 
    more and the motion is superdiffusive for short times where MSD is proportional 
    to tau squared and quickly becomes diffusive when they get blocked by the 
    passive particles. At lowest noise level of 0.03pi the superdiffusive regime is 
    longest and we can observe the formation of fully-fledged channels,
    whose presence is clearly shown by the blue shaded areas. 
    These are open areas free of passive particles where the
    active particles can propagate unhindered. 

    Here video showing the active particles behaviors at different noise level.

Slide 10
    To put it simply, we want to observe this similar behavior experimentally,
    where active particles behavior changes similar to this as some parameter 
    is tuned. So the experimental setup was then built and this is how it looks 
    like.

Slide 11
    The main setup consist of a main wooden frame for for the purpose 
    of holding the glass panel in place. The glass panel is the surface 
    for the active particles to move on. The glass panel ensures a smooth 
    surface and provide the options to record the experiments from both 
    above and below. A boundary frame that is placed on top of the glass 
    panel to keep the active particles in the stage. Paper sheet on top 
    for a homogeneous background and spotlights to improve the light conditions 
    for the recordings that was done using a wide angle camera that was place 
    in the bottom of the table. 

    To prevent the active particles from falling of the stage, we use a boundary frame 
    as mentioned before. Two types were used as seen here.

Slide 12
    Cloud shape and rectangular shape. The first one that were used was the rectangular 
    shaped one. We realized quickly on that this was wasn't optimal since the 
    bugs spend too much time going alongside the walls of this boundary as can be seen 
    here.

Slide 13
    I used the term bug for the active particles and you'll seee why later on. 
    Aften some times the bugs will manage to push away obstacles close to walls 
    and form channels where they will frequently traverse along and they spend 
    very little time at the center of the stage. The right figure here show their 
    trajectories in red where you can see that the color is thicker close to the 4 walls 
    showing that goes there more frequently than inside close to center. 

    So a new boundary frame was made to improve this.

Slide 14
    With this new cloud boundary frame the bugs spend more time inside where 
    they can interact with the obstacles. Now, when they hit the walls, they are 
    instead redirected towards center again. We can also seen in the snapshot 
    to the right where their trajectories in red in now evently distributed 
    inside the stage and not merely concentrated close to the walls. 

    Now that I've mentioned the term bug as active particles, here's why

Slide 15
    The active particles used are robot bugs of different types. 
    They are simpe robots that can only move forward when turned on. 
    The first one is so called toy solar bugs that has a small solar panel built 
    in on top of the bug. The rest are different modifications of the Hexbug nano.

Slide 16
    We fist experimented with the toy solar bugs and manage to capture some footage. 
    We used two construction lamps as source of illumination and manage to make the bugs 
    move abit. But the bug would stop moving when coming to a darker area to which 
    we had to relocate the bugs again to a brighter area. Also these bugs would only react 
    to light that produce alot of heat. And when recording for too long, the bugs would 
    get damaged from heat where parts of the body would melt. 

    Here's video showing one of the first experiments using these toy solar bugs.

Slide 17
    As can be seen they would only move at bright areas, they would stop moving 
    at darker places, where either the light is not focused or areas where the light is shaded 
    by the obstacles.

    After this we move on to use the Hexbug nano.

Slide 18
    Here in the top right figure are the Hexbug Nano is their origianl form. 
    The Hexbug nano are more vibrant than the previous ones. We made an attemp to 
    still using solar panel to drive the bugs, now using an external solar panel that 
    was bigger than before to mount on top of the bugs. But we could not find a good 
    enough arrangement of light source to make the bugs move consistently within the big stage. 
    Also with the big solar panel mounted on top the shape of the bugs create bad interactions 
    with other bugs where the solar panels would overlap upon collisions and they would get stuck. 

    Then we try to use the bare Hexbug that is driven by batteries. These are very vibrant 
    when using batteries and would sometimes tip over by themselves or climp over obstacles. 
    Also the pointy head made them spend long time in digging through obstacles shown 
    in lower left figure, instead of bouncing off to find a new path like in the lower right figure. 

    So we had to futher modify these bugs.

Slide 19    
    We tried to glue 3d printed plastic circles on the head to remove the pointy head, 
    but again these circles would overlap upon collisions and the bug would get stuck. 
    Then we tried to wrap paper srip around the bugs body. This shown to work quite well 
    where the bug would no longer tip over or spend to long time digging through obstacles. 
    With the paper strip, the extra weight was negligeble and now the bug has a rod shape 
    which create aligning interactions.

    As for passive particles or obstacles

Slide 20 
    We used 3D printed cups with diameter roughly half the size of the bugs, 
    and sligly taller than the bugs. These cups are made hollow inside where 
    weight can be inserted. The weight used are M8 nuts and one cup can hold up 
    to 3 nuts. So the weight of one obstacle can vary from 2 to 17 grams. 
    The idea is to use the obstacle weight as a parameter to mimic the noise 
    level from the simulation where high obstacle weight should provide 
    similar conditions as high noise level in the simulation. 

    The finished experimental setup looks like this.

Slide 21
    Including an image of the table taken inside the lab.

Slide 22
    So, what are we looking for when conduction the experiments? 
    In general we want to see how the active particles behaviors changes 
    when we tune a parameter. Whether or not similar behaviors can be observed 
    as in the simulation. If there is some sort of transition from disordered 
    movement of the individual active particles to highly aligned collective 
    motion. Also if there are any other collective beaviors that can be observed.

    The parameter at hand that we can change are the obstacle weight, 
    the obstacle density and the number of active particles. 

Slide 23
    Before doing the experiments we can already guess for example 
    that increasing the obstacle density should minimize the bugs 
    motion, as well as increasing the obstacle weight. Less intuitive 
    is the number of bugs. More bugs mike lead to more formation of channels 
    that the bugs can move through, or they might just hinder each other 
    due to congestion.

    Lets first look at how the obstacle density affects the bugs behavior.

Slide 24
    To the left we se the bugs trajetories after a 1000 frames, showing 
    the stage at four different obstacle density. You clearly see how the 
    stage is almost covered in red trajectories when the obstacle density is 
    low with 400 obstacles. As wee increase the obstacle density, 
    the trajectories gets less dens and with 1300 obstacles, the trajectories 
    is concentrated only in small area. This show how the bugs are being blocked 
    in the same place for a long time. 

    On top right is the bugs MSD when using different obstacle density. 
    We can see that the MSD is higher when the obstacle density is low. 
    With a slope slightly steeper for the low for the low obstacles density cases. 
    Also the bugs velocity density distribution show that the density for lower 
    obstacle density peak at a higher velocity, compare the high obstacle density cases. 
    These experiments were done by varying the obstacle density while keeping the 
    obstacle weight and the number of bugs fixed. The same result holds while using 
    other obstacle weights and number of bugs, while varying the obstacle density.

Slide 25
    Now when varying the obstacle weight, similarly we see that the trajectories 
    is spread out across the entire stage when using light obstacles, here the lightest 
    ones being 2 grams. As the obstacle weigh increases, the trajectories is less 
    spread out and with the highest obstacle weight of 17 grams, the trajectories 
    is only concentrated in small area. We also see the MSD for different obstacle 
    weight cases where the MSD is higher for lower obstacle weights, also with a 
    steeper slope. The velocity density show also that the peak shifts towards zero 
    velocity as the obstacle weight increses.

Slide 26
    Lastly varying the number of bugs. The trajectories doesn't say much about 
    this parameter since more bugs leaves more trajectories. If we instead look 
    at the MSD, we see a slight difference where the MSD is slightly higher when the 
    number of bugs is low and the velocity density shows that the peaks shifts to 
    the left towards zero as the number of bugs increases. 

    Maybe not as intuitive of a result compared to the other parameters. 
    But there is an explanation of why this is the case. 
    Before I get into that, lets see how the bugs orietation changes 
    in different conditions.

Slide 27
    The orientation was a bit hard to measure. We study the orientational changes 
    by looking at the angular velocity and see how the different parameters 
    affect it. The angular velocity density distribution is shown for different 
    parameters. Eventhough the different experiments peaks at zero, we can observe 
    minor differences where increasing the obstacle density leads to a higher 
    peak at zero angular velocity, in top figure. This show that at high obstacle 
    density the bugs has less space to turn, hence low angular velocity. 
    Increasing the number of bugs also leads to a higher peak at zero, lower left figure. 
    Though when increasing the the obstacle weight, the peak seems to be lower. 
    This can be due to when the bugs collide with a heavier obstacle, it bounces off 
    changing its direction more abruptly than it would with a light obstacle 
    where it instead push the obstacle forward abit before changing its direction.

    Next we go through some collective behaviors that were observed.

Slide 28
    Remember the issues concerning the boundary frames where the currently 
    used cloud shaped boundary was suppose to redirect the bugs to center. 
    Well it does that quite well, but the bugs sometimes still get stuck 
    at the walls now due to other bugs blocking. They're going against each 
    other at the walls preventing each other to move. Here we see snapshots 
    where different number of bugs are involved, from 2 to 9 bugs.

    This explain what was seen earlier when using the number of bugs as a parameter. 
    That the MSD is lower when the number of bugs increases, because of this congestion 
    behavior.

Slide 29
    Another collective behavior is when the bugs help each other to push away 
    large blocks of obstacles. One bug might not be strong enough to push 
    it all by itself, but with other bugs assistance they are able to push 
    away many obstacles, clearing path for other bugs to go through.
    On top figure one bug trying to push the obstacles to its right, then two 
    more bugs come to assist and they manage to clear away this big block. 
    Two other examples below.

Slide 30
    It also happens that the bugs help each other by pushing onto one another. 
    For example in the top row, one bug is trying to go through a narrow passage 
    but get stuck, then another bug comes behind and push the first one and they 
    both manage to go through this passage. Here in the bottom, a bug spend long 
    time digging through obstacles trying to form a channel, another bug then 
    comes to assistance by pushing the first one and speeds up the process 
    of creating channel.

Slide 31
    Next behavior is when a bug circling inside a circle shaped channel for many 
    lapses. Here up to 7 lapses. The bugs manage to stay inside this type 
    of channel for many lapses partly due to its chirality, but also the fact 
    that this type of channel is more stable since the walls are made up by 
    both obstacles and the boundary frame. This type of local channel is more 
    stable than the ones that stretches across the stage.

Slide 32
    This type of long channels is hard to observe since they get destroy quite 
    fast, by other bugs pushing obstacles into the channel and blocking it or 
    bugs cutting through the walls of the channels.

Slide 33 
    Here again long channels where several bugs goes through. Occurs rarely 
    and gets destroyed quickly.

    To conclude this

Slide 34
    We saw similar result as in the simulation where the motion of the 
    active particles get more restricted as we increase variables like 
    the obstacle density, the obstacle weight and the number of active particles. 
    High obstacle density and obstacle weight lead to diffusive motions. 
    Contrarily low obstacle weight and low obstacle density lead to 
    superdiffusive motions where the active particles were able to form 
    channels and reuse them. We could also observe some collective behaviors.

Slide 35 
    Some improvements can be doen in the future where we can try to make 
    the obstacles move like real passive particles that undergo translational 
    diffusion. Also improve the video capturing process and tracking 
    with better camera, lights or increase contrast between different objects, 
    and maybe another tracking software. 

    We could also scale up the experiment with a larger stage and more 
    particles. And maybe get the solar concept to work.

Slide 36
    Thank you for listening and I'll take questions if you have any.